On a december afternoon in chicago during the middle of world war ii scientist cracked open the nucleus at the center of the uranium atom and turned nuclear mass into energy over and over again. They did this by creating for the first time a chain reaction inside a new engineering marvel the nuclear reactor since then the ability to mine great amounts of energy from uranium nuclei has led some to build nuclear power as a plentiful utopian source of electricity. A modern nuclear reactor generate enough electricity from 1 kg of fuel to power an average american household for nearly 34 years. But rather than dominate the global electricity. Nuclear power has declined from an all-time high of 18. In 1996 to 11% today. And it's expected to drop further in the coming decades. What happens to the great promise of this technology. It turns out nuclear power faces many hurdles including high construction cost and public opposition. And behind these problems by a series of unique engineering challenges. Nuclear power relies on the fission of uranium nuclei in a controlled chain reaction that reproduces this splitting in many more nuclei. The atomic nucleus is densely packed with protons and. Bound by a powerful nuclear force. Most uranium atoms have a total of 238 protons and. But roughly one in every 140 last three nutria. And this lighter isotope is less tightly bound. Compared to its more abundant. Strike by a neutron easily split the u-235 nuclear. Into lighter radioactive. Coldfusion price. In addition to 223 neutrons gamma rays and a few neutrinos. During fission some nuclear mass transformed into energy. A fraction of the newfound energy powers the fast-moving neutrons. And if some of them strike uranium nuclei fission results in the second larger generation of neutrons. If this second generation of newt. Strike more uranium nuclei more fission results in an even larger 3rd generation. So on but inside a nuclear reactor this spiraling chain reaction. Is tamed using control rods made of elements that capture excess neutrons. And keep their number in check. With controlled chain reaction a reactor draws power steadily and stably for years. The neutron lead chain reaction is a potent process driving nuclear power but there's a cat. That can result in unique demands on the production of its fuel. It turns out most of the neutrons emitted from fission have too much kinetic energy. Captured by uranium nuclei. The fission rate is too low. And the chain reaction fizzled out. The first nuclear reactor built in chicago used graphite as a moderator. Scatter and slow down neutrons just enough to increase their capture by uranium and raise the rate of fission. Modern reactors commonly use purified water as a moderator. But the scattered neutrons are still a little too fast. To compensate and keep up the chain reaction the concentration of u-235 is enriched to 427 times its natural abundance. Today in richmond is often done by passing a gaseous uranium comp. Through centrifuge. Two separate lighter u-235. Heavier u-238. But the same process can be continued to highly enriched u-235 up to 130 times its natural abundance. And create an explosive chain reaction in a bomb. Methods like centrifuge processing must be carefully regulated to limit the spread of bomb-grade fuel. Remember only a fraction of the released fission energy goes into speeding up neutron. Most of the nuclear power goes into the kinetic energy of the fission products. Those are captured inside the reactor. Heat buy a cooler. Usually purified water. This heat is eventually used to drive an electric turbine generator by steam just outside the reactor water flows critical not only to create electric. But also to guard against the most dreaded type of reactor accident. Is water flow stops because a pipe carrying it breaks or the pumps that push it. Fail the uranium heats up very quickly and melts. During a nuclear meltdown radioactive vapors escape into the reactor and if the reactor failed to hold them a steel and concrete containment build. Is the last line of defense. But if the radioactive gas pressure is too high containment fail and the gases escaped into the air. Spreading as far and wide as the wind blows. The radioactive fission products in these vapors eventually decay into stable elements. Well some decay in a few. Others take hundreds of thousands of years. The greatest challenge for a nuclear reactor is to safely contain these products. Keep them from harming humans or the environment. Containment doesn't stop mattering once the fuel is. Stop in fact it becomes an even greater store in prague. Everyone to to you. Some spent fuel is removed from reactors. And stored in pools of water that cool the waste and block its radioactive emission the irradiated fuel is a mix of uranium that failed vision vision products and plutonium a radioactive material not found in nature this mix must be isolated from the info. Until it has all safely decay. Many countries proposed deep time storage in tunnel. Drilled far underground. But none have been built and there's great uncertainty about their long-term security. How can a nation that has existed for only a few hundred. Planta guard plutonium. Radioactive half-life of 20. 4000 years today many nuclear power plants sit on their waist and. Storing them indefinitely on. Apart from radioactivity there's an even greater danger with spent fuel. Plutonium can sustain a chain reaction. And can be mined from the waist to make bomb. Storing spent fuel is dust not only a safety risk for the environment but also a secure. 4 nation. Who should be the watchmen to guard it. Visionary scientist from the early years of the nuclear age. Pioneered how to reliably. The tremendous amount of. Inside an atom. As an explosive bomb and as a controlled power source with incredible potential. But their successors have learned humbling in. About the technologies not so utopian indust. No limits mining the subatomic realm makes for campo. Expensive and risky engineering. 